# Monarch Standard Operating Procedures

## New projects

### Creating a new project

1. Every new project in the "monarch-initative" organisation MUST establish a _public GitHub repository_.
1. Every new project MUST have an associated documentation page. A documentation page MUST fulfill the following criteria:
    1. Required information
        1. A "home" page which explains what the project is. A Monarch Initiative logo MUST be displayed somewhere on the page.
        1. A "contributing" page that explains, or links to an explanation, of how to contribute to the project.
        1. A "use cases" page that explains concrete use cases of the project.
        1. A "Other Monarch Docs" backlink to the main Monarch documentation pages (https://monarch-initiative.github.io/monarch-documentation/)
        1. An "Editors guide" that explains how the resource is maintained. The information should be sufficient for a new developer to take up maintenance of the resource.
        1. A "contact" page with clear instructions on how to contact the primary maintainer of the resource.
    1. The documentation SHOULD be maintained in markdown, and SHOULD follow the [Monarch style guide](#monarch-style-guide).
1. Every new project MUST assign an [accountable contact person](#contact).
1. Every new project MUST be registered in the [Monarch Asset Registry](https://github.com/monarch-initiative/monarch-documentation/blob/main/src/data/resources.yaml) database.
1. Every new project that is either a new ontology, a new datamodel or schema, or a new software project, MUST follow their respective SOP (see below).

### Creating a new ontology

1. Every new ontology MUST use a standard [ODK setup](https://github.com/INCATools/ontology-development-kit).

### Creating a data model or schema

1. Every new data model MUST use the [LinkML Project Template](https://github.com/linkml/linkml-project-cookiecutter/).

### Creating a new Python project

1. Every new python project in Monarch SHOULD use the [Monarch Project Template](https://github.com/monarch-initiative/monarch-project-template) to ensure uniform QC standards.

## Monarch Style guide

- Monarch documentation pages SHOULD follow the "materials" theme provided by the mkdocs framework. NOTE: This recommendation is provisional until we have a better colour scheme in place.

## Monarch AI Guidelines

- Every commit and PR created by an AI agent / tool MUST be created by a _dedicated AI user account_. Human user accounts MUST NOT be used for AI-generated content.
- AI-generated content (especially that is _not reviewed_ by humans) MUST be flagged with appropriate metadata whenever it is asserted (ontologies or KGs). For example, axioms generated by an AI tool MUST be clearly marked as such by (a) providing a reference to the AI tool used and (b) providing an indication THAT the content was generated by an AI tool (e.g. MONDO:AI_GENERATED).

<a id="contact"></a>

## Responsibilities of the "primary contact" of a resource (PCR)

1. Monitor the projects issue tracker. 
   - User issues MUST be responded to within 2 weeks.
   - Monarch internal issues MUST be responded to within 1 month.
1. Respond to non-issue-tracker user correspondence (slack or email) 
   - User issues MUST be responded to within 2 weeks.
   - Monarch internal issues MUST be responded to within 1 month.
1. If the PCR is missing for more than 2 weeks at a time, they SHOULD name a replacement contact
1. The PCR MUST report progress to the wider Monarch Community and Organisation on request by Monarch Leadership.
1. The PCR MUST ensure the relevant SOPs to their resource, such as documentation requirements, are upheld.